                                          COMP 354: Introduction to  Software Engineering  Project Management Concepts Based on Chapter 24 of the textbook   COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts    Management Spectrum - Four Ps  People - the most important element   of a successful project.  Product - the software to be built.  Process - the set of framework   activities and software engineering  tasks to get the job done.   Project - all work required to make the  product a reality.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 1    Stakeholders  Senior managers - define the business issues that   often have significant influence on the project.  Project (technical) managers - who must plan,   motivate, organize, and control the practitioner.  Practitioners - who deliver the technical skills that are   necessary to engineer a product or application.  Customers - specify requirements for the software to   be engineered and other interested product  stakeholders.   End-users - interact with the software once it is  released for production use.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 2    Team Leaders Kouzes exemplary practices for technology leaders:  Model the way. Leaders must practice what they preach. They   demonstrate commitment to team and project by shared  sacrifice.   Inspire and shared vision. Motivate team members to tie their  personal aspirations to team goals. Involve stakeholders early.   Challenge the process. Encourage team members to experiment  and take risks by helping them generate frequent small  successes while learning from their failures.   Enable others to act. Increase the teams sense of competence  through sharing decision making and goal setting.   Encourage the heart. Build community (team) spirit by  celebrating shared goals and victories (individual and team).  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 3    Factors Affecting  Software Team Structure  Difficulty of the problem to be solved.  Size of the resultant program(s) in lines of code or   function points.  Team lifetimes - time that the team will stay   together.  Degree to which the problem can be modularized.  Required quality and reliability of the system to be   built.  Rigidity of the delivery date.  Communication (degree of sociability) required. COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 4    Team Toxicity Factors  Frenzied work atmosphere team members waste   energy and lose focus on work objectives.  High frustration caused by personal, business, or   technological factors causing team member friction.  Fragmented or poorly coordinated procedures poorly   defined or improperly chosen process model.  Unclear definition of roles resulting in lack of   accountability and resultant finger-pointing.  Continuous and repeated exposure to failure leads to   a loss of confidence and a lowering of morale.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 5    Agile Teams  Team members must have trust in one another.  The distribution of skills must be appropriate to   the problem.  Mavericks may have to be excluded from the   team, if team cohesiveness is to be maintained.  Team is self-organizing.   An adaptive team structure.  Planning is kept to a minimum.  Team select its own approach constrained by business   requirements and organizational standards.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 6    Team Coordination and  Communication Issues  Scale of many development efforts is large,   leading to complexity, confusion, and significant  difficulties in coordinating team members.    Uncertainty is common, resulting in a continuing  stream of changes that ratchets the project  team.    Interoperability - new software must  communicate with existing software and conform  to constraints imposed by existing systems or  products.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 7    Team Coordination and  Communication  To accomplish this, mechanisms for formal and   informal communication among team members  and between multiple teams must be established.    Formal communication is accomplished through  writing, structured meetings, and other relatively  non-interactive and impersonal communication  channels.    Informal communication is more personal and  allow team members to interact with one another  on a daily basis - share ideas on an ad hoc basis  and ask for help as problems arise.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 8    Software Scope  Software project scope must be unambiguous and   understandable at management and technical levels.  Context. How does the software to be built fit into a   larger system, product, or business context and what  constraints are imposed as a result of the context?   Information objectives. What customer-visible data  objects are produced as output from the software?  What data objects are required for input?   Function and performance. What function does the  software perform to transform input data into  output? Are any special performance characteristics  to be addressed?  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 9    Problem Decomposition  Sometimes called partitioning or problem   elaboration.  Once scope is defined    It is decomposed into constituent functions.  It can be decomposed into user-visible data   objects. or  It can be decomposed into a set of problem   classes.  Decomposition process continues until all   functions or problem classes have been  defined.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 10    Process  Your team must decide which process model is most   appropriate for.  the customers who have requested the product.  the people who will do the work.  the characteristics of the product itself.  the project environment in which the software team works.   Team selects process model and defines a  preliminary project plan (based set of process  framework activities).   Once the preliminary plan is established, process  decomposition begins.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 11    Melding Product and Process  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 12    Successful Project  Characteristics   Clear and well-understood requirements   accepted by all stakeholders.  Active and continuous participation of users   throughout the development process.  A project manager with required leadership skills   who is able to share project vision with the team.  A project plan and schedule developed with   stakeholder participation to achieve user goals.  Skilled and engaged team members.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 13    Successful Project  Characteristics   Development team members with compatible   personalities who enjoy working in a  collaborative environment.   Realistic schedule and budget estimates which  are monitored and maintained.   Customer needs that are understood and  satisfied.   Team members who experience a high degree of  job satisfaction.   A working product that reflects desired scope  and quality.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 14    W5HH Principle  Why is the system being developed?  What will be done?   When will it be accomplished?  Who is responsible?  Where are they organizationally located?  How will the job be done technically and   managerially?  How much of each resource (for example,   people, software, tools, database) will be  needed?  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 15    Critical Practices  Formal risk management.  Empirical cost and schedule estimation.  Metrics-based project management.  Earned value tracking.  Defect tracking against quality targets.  People aware project management.  COMP 354, Fall 2023 Project Management Concepts 16    