































COMP 354: Introduction to 
Software Engineering

Risk Management
Based on Chapter 26 of the textbook 

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management



Reactive Risk Management
 Project team reacts to risks when they 

occur.
 Mitigation—plan for additional resources 

in anticipation of fire fighting.
 Fix on failure—resource are found and 

applied when the risk strikes.
 Crisis management—failure does not 

respond to applied resources and 
project is in jeopardy.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 1



Proactive Risk Management
 Potential risks are identified, their probability and 

impact are assessed, and they are ranked by 
importance.

 Software team establishes a plan for managing risk. 
 Primary objective is to avoid risk, but because not all 

risks can be avoided.
 Team works to develop a contingency plans that will 

enable it to respond in a controlled and effective 
manner. 

 Proactive risk management is a software engineering 
tools that can be used to reduce technical debt. 

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 2



Software Risks
 Project risks threaten the project plan. 
 Technical risks threaten the quality and timeliness of 

the software to be produced. 
 Business risks threaten the viability of the software to 

be built and often jeopardize the project or the 
product. 

 Known risks are those that can be uncovered after 
careful evaluation of the project plan. 

 Predictable risks are extrapolated from past project 
experience. 

 Unpredictable risks can and do occur, but they are 
extremely difficult to identify in advance.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 3



Risk Management Principles 
 Maintain a global perspective - view software 

risks within the context of system and the 
business problem.

 Take a forward-looking view - think about the 
risks that may arise in the future;  establish 
contingency plans.

 Encourage open communication - if someone 
states a potential risk, don’t discount it. 

 Integrate - a consideration of risk must be 
integrated into the software process.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 4



Risk Management Principles 
 Emphasize a continuous process - team must be 

vigilant throughout the software process, 
modifying identified risks as more information is 
known and adding new ones as better insight is 
achieved.

 Develop a shared product vision - if all 
stakeholders share the same vision of the 
software, it is likely that better risk identification 
and assessment will occur.

 Encourage teamwork - the talents, skills and 
knowledge of all stakeholder should be pooled.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 5



Risk Identification 
 Product size - risks associated with the overall size of 

the software to be built or modified.
 Business impact - risks associated with constraints 

imposed by management or the marketplace.
 Customer characteristics - risks associated with the 

sophistication of the customer and the developer's 
ability to communicate with the customer in a timely 
manner.

 Process definition - risks associated with the degree 
to which the software process has been defined and 
is followed by the development organization.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 6



Risk Identification 
 Development environment - risks associated with the 

availability and quality of the tools to be used to build 
the product.

 Technology to be built - risks associated with the 
complexity of the system to be built and the 
"newness" of the technology that is packaged by the 
system.

 Staff size and experience - risks associated with the 
overall technical and project experience of the 
software engineers who will do the work.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 7



Assessing Project Risk 
 Have top software and customer managers 

formally committed to support the project?
 Are end-users enthusiastically committed to the 

project and the system/product to be built?
 Are requirements fully understood by the 

software engineering team and their customers?
 Have customers been involved fully in the 

definition of requirements?
 Do end-users have realistic expectations?
 Is project scope stable?
COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 8



Assessing Project Risk 
 Does the software engineering team have the right 

mix of skills?
 Are project requirements stable?
 Does the project team have experience with the 

technology to be implemented?
 Is the number of people on the project team 

adequate to do the job?
 Do all customer/user constituencies agree on the 

importance of the project and on the requirements 
for the system/product to be built?

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 9



Risk Components
 Performance risk - the degree of uncertainty that 

the product will meet its requirements and be fit 
for its intended use.

 Cost risk - the degree of uncertainty that the 
project budget will be maintained.

 Support risk - the degree of uncertainty that the 
resultant software will be easy to correct, adapt, 
and enhance.

 Schedule risk - the degree of uncertainty that the 
project schedule will be maintained and that the 
product will be delivered on time.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 10



Risk Projection 
(Risk Estimation)
 Risk projection attempts to rate each risk in two 

ways:
 Likelihood or probability that the risk is real.
 Consequences of the problems associated with the risk, 

 The are four risk projection steps:
1. Establish a scale that reflects the perceived likelihood of a 

risk.
2. Delineate the consequences of the risk.
3. Estimate the impact of the risk on the project and the 

product,
4. Note the overall accuracy of the risk projection so that 

there will be no misunderstandings.
COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 11



Risk Table

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 12



Building Risk Table
 Estimate the probability of occurrence.
 Estimate the impact on the project on a 

scale of 1 to 5, where,
1 = low impact on project success
5 = catastrophic impact on project

success
 Sort the table by probability and impact.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 13



Risk Impact (Exposure)
The overall risk exposure, RE, is 
determined using the following 
relationship [Hal98]:

RE = P × C
where 
P is the probability of occurrence for a risk, and 
C is the cost to the project should the risk 
occur.
COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 14



Risk Exposure Example
 Risk identification. Only 70 percent of the software 

components scheduled for reuse will be used, the 
rest will have to be custom developed.

 Risk probability. 80% (likely).
 Risk impact. 60 reusable software components were 

planned. If only 70 percent can be used, 18 
components would have to be developed from 
scratch. The average component is 100 LOC and the 
software engineering cost for each LOC is $14.00, 
the overall cost (impact) to develop the components 
is 18 × 100 × 14 = $25,200.

 Risk exposure.
COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 15

RE 0.80 25,200 $20,200.= × 



Risk Mitigation, Monitoring, 
and Management
 Mitigation - how can we avoid the risk?
 Monitoring - what factors can we track 

that will enable us to determine if the 
risk is becoming more or less likely?

 Management - what contingency plans 
do we have if the risk becomes a 
reality?

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 16



Risk Information Sheet

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Risk Management 17


