































COMP 354: Introduction to 
Software Engineering

Software Quality Concepts
Based on Chapter 15 of the textbook 

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Software Quality Concepts



Relative Costs to 
Find and Repair a Defect

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Software Quality Concepts 1



Software Quality
 Software quality can be defined as: 

 An effective software process applied in a manner 
that creates a useful product that provides 
measurable value for those who produce it and 
those who use it.

 Advantages of providing useful products:
 Greater software product revenue.
 Better profitability when an application supports a 

business process.
 Improved availability of information that is crucial 

for the business.
COMP 354, Fall 2023 Software Quality Concepts 2



Software Quality –
Effective Process
 An effective software process establishes 

infrastructure that supports building a high-quality 
software product. 

 The management aspects of process create the 
checks and balances that help avoid project chaos—a 
key contributor to poor quality.

 Software engineering practices allow the developer to 
analyze the problem and design a solid solution—
both critical to building high quality software. 

 Umbrella activities such as change management and 
technical reviews have as much to do with quality as 
any other part of software engineering practice.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Software Quality Concepts 3



Software Quality –
Useful Product
 A useful product delivers the content, functions, 

and features that the end-user desires.
 But as important, it delivers these assets in a 

reliable, error free way. 
 A useful product always satisfies those 

requirements that have been explicitly stated by 
stakeholders. 

 A useful product satisfies a set of implicit 
requirement that are expected of all high-quality 
software.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Software Quality Concepts 4



Software Quality –
Adding Value
 By adding value for both the producer and user 

of a software product, high quality software 
provides benefits for the software organization 
and the end-user community. 

 The software organization gains added value 
because high quality software requires less 
maintenance effort, fewer bug fixes, and reduced 
customer support. 

 The user community gains added value because 
the application provides a useful capability in a 
way that expedites some business process. 

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Software Quality Concepts 5



Achieving Software Quality 
 Software quality is the result of good project 

management and solid engineering practice.
 To build high quality software you must understand 

the problem to be solved and be capable of creating 
a quality design the conforms to the problem 
requirements.

 Project management – project plan includes explicit 
techniques for quality and change management.
 Use estimation to verify that delivery dates are achievable.
 Schedule is understood and team avoids taking shortcuts.
 Risk planning is conducted so problems do not breed chaos, 

software quality will be affected in a positive way.
COMP 354, Fall 2023 Software Quality Concepts 6



Achieving Software Quality 
 Project plan should include explicit techniques for quality 

and change management.
 Quality control - series of inspections, reviews, and tests 

used to ensure conformance of a work product to its 
specifications.

 Quality assurance - consists of the auditing and reporting 
procedures used to provide management with data 
needed to make proactive decisions.

 Defect prediction is an important part of identifying 
software components that may have quality concerns.

 Machine learning and statistical models may help identify 
relationships between metrics and defection components.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 Software Quality Concepts 7


