































COMP 354: Introduction to 
Software Engineering

User Experience Design
Based on Chapter 12 of the textbook 

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design



User Experience Design 
Elements 
User experience design tries to ensure that no aspect of your software 
appears in the final product without the explicit decision of 
stakeholders to include it.
 Strategy. Identifies user needs and customer business goals that 

form the basis for all U X design work.
 Scope. Includes both the functional and content requirements 

needed to realize a feature set consistent with the project strategy.
 Structure. Consists of the interaction design [For example, how 

the system reacts in response to user action] and information 
architecture.

 Skeleton. Comprised of three components: information design, 
interface design, navigation design.

 Surface. Presents visual design or the appearance of the finished 
project to its users.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 1



User Experience Design 
Elements 

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 2



Information Architecture
 Information architecture structures lead organization, 

labeling, navigation, and searching of content objects.
 Content architecture focuses on the manner content 

objects are structured for presentation and navigation.
 Software architecture addresses the manner the 

application is structured to manage user interaction, 
effect navigation, and present content.

 Architecture design is conducted in parallel with 
interface design, aesthetic design, and content design.

 Decisions made during architecture design action will 
influence work conducted during navigation design. 

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 3



User Interaction Design
 Interaction design focuses on interface between product and user.
 Modes of user input and output include voice input, computer 

speech generation, touch input, 3D printed output, immersive 
augmented reality experiences, and sensor tracking of users.

 User interaction should be defined by the stakeholders in the user 
stories created to describe how users can accomplish their goals 
using the software product.

 User interaction design should also include a plan for how 
information should be presented within such a system and how to 
enable the user to understand that information.

 It is important to recall that the purpose of the user interface is to 
present just enough information to help the users decide what 
their next action should be to accomplish their goal and how to 
perform it.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 4



Usability Engineering
 Usability engineering is part of UX design work that defines the 

specification, design, and testing of the human-computer 
interaction portion of a software product.

 This software engineering action focuses on devising human-
computer interfaces that have high usability. 

 If developers focus on making a product easy to learn, easy to 
use, and easy to remember over time, usability can be 
measured quantitatively and tested for improvements in 
usability.

 Accessibility is the degree to which people with special needs 
are provided with a means to perceive, understand, navigate, 
and interact with computer products.

 Accessibility is another aspect of usability engineering that 
needs to be considered during design.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 5



Visual Design
 Visual design (aesthetic design or graphic design) is an 

artistic endeavor that complements the technical aspects 
of the user experience design.

 Without it, a software product may be functional, but 
unappealing.

 With it, a product draws its users into a world that 
embraces them on an emotional as well as an intellectual 
level.

 Graphic design considers every aspect of the look and feel 
of a web or mobile app.

 Not every software engineer has artistic talent. If you fall 
into this category, hire an experienced graphic designer to 
help.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 6



Golden Rule 1: 
Place User in Control
 Define interaction modes in a way that does not 

force a user into unnecessary or undesired 
actions. 

 Provide for flexible interaction. 
 Allow user interaction to be interruptible and 

undoable. 
 Streamline interaction as skill levels advance and 

allow the interaction to be customized.  
 Hide technical internals from the casual user. 
 Design for direct interaction with screen objects. 
COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 7



Golden Rule 2: 
Reduce User’s Memory Load
 Reduce demand on short-term memory. 
 Establish meaningful defaults.  
 Define shortcuts that are intuitive. 
 The visual layout of the interface should 

be based on a real-world metaphor. 
 Disclose information in a progressive 

fashion.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 8



Golden Rule 3: 
Make Interface Consistent
 Allow the user to put the current task 

into a meaningful context. 
 Maintain consistency across a family of 

applications. 
 If past interactive models have created 

user expectations, do not make 
changes unless there is a compelling 
reason to do so. 

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 9



User Interface Design Models
 User model — a profile of all end users of the 

system.
 Design model — a design realization of the user 

model.
 Mental model (system perception) — the user’s 

mental image of what the interface is.
 Implementation model — the interface “look and 

feel” coupled with supporting information that 
describe interface syntax and semantics.

 An interface designer needs to reconcile these 
models and derive a consistent representation of the 
interface.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 10



User Interface Design Process

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 11



User Interface Analysis and 
Design
 Interface analysis focuses on the profile of the users who 

will interact with the system.
 Interface design defines a set of interface objects and 

actions that enable a user to perform all defined tasks in a 
manner that meets every usability goal defined for the 
system.

 Interface construction normally begins with the creation of 
a prototype that enables usage scenarios to be evaluated.

 Interface validation focuses on:
1. The ability of the interface to implement every user task 

correctly.
2. The degree to which interface is easy to use and easy to learn.
3. The user’s acceptance of the interface as a tool in her work.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 12



User Experience Analysis
In the case of user experience design, 
understanding the problem means understanding: 
1. the people (end users) who will interact with 

the system through the interface.
2. the tasks that end users must perform to do 

their work.
3. the content that is presented as part of the 

interface.
4. the environment in which these tasks will be 

conducted.
COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 13



Using Customer Journey Map
1. Gather stakeholders. 
2. Conduct research. Collect all information you can about all 

the things users may experience as they use the software 
product and define your customer phases (touchpoints).

3. Build the model. Create a visualization of the touch points.
4. Refine the design. Recruit a designer to make the 

deliverable visually appealing and ensure touchpoints are 
identified clearly.

5. Identify gaps. Note any gaps in the customer experience 
or points of friction or pain (poor transition between 
phases).

6. Implement your findings. Assign responsible parties to 
bridge the gaps and resolve pain points found.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 14



Customer Journey Map

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 15



Creating and Using Personas 
in UX Design
 Data collection and analysis. Stakeholders collect information 

about proposed product users and determine the user group 
needs.

 Describe personas. The developers need to decide how many 
personas to create and decide which persona will be their focus.

 Develop scenarios. Scenarios are user stories about how 
personas will use the product being developed. They may focus 
on the touchpoints and obstacles described in the customer 
journey.

 Acceptance by stakeholders. Often this is done by validating the 
scenarios using a review technique or demonstration called 
cognitive walkthrough (stakeholders assume the role defined by 
a persona and work through a scenario using a system 
prototype).

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 16



Persona Example

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 17



Task Analysis
Goal of task (scenario) analysis is to answer the 
following questions:
 What work will the user perform in specific 

circumstances?
 What tasks and subtasks will be performed as 

the user does the work?
 What specific problem domain objects will the 

user manipulate as work is performed?
 What is the sequence of work tasks—the 

workflow?
 What is the hierarchy of tasks?
COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 18



Iterative UX Design Process

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 19



Google 
5-Day UX Design Sprint 
 Understand. User research activities (user needs and business 

goals) for the software product. This information is posted on 
whiteboards (For example, customer journey maps, personas, 
user task workflow) for easy reference throughout the sprint.

 Sketch. Individual stakeholders are given the time and space 
needed to brainstorm solutions to the problems discovered in 
the understand phase. Paper drawings and notes are easy to 
generate, easy to modify, and quite inexpensive.

 Decide. Each stakeholder presents his solution sketch and the 
team votes to determine the solutions that should be tackled in 
the prototyping activities that will follow. If there is not a clear 
consensus following the voting, the development team may 
decide to consider assumptions that involve project constraints 
and resources.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 20



Google 
5-Day UX Design Sprint 
 Prototype. May be a minimally viable product based on the 

solution selected from the sketch phase, or it may be based on 
the portions of the customer journey map or storyboard you 
want to evaluate with potential users in the validate phase. This 
means the team should be developing test cases based on the 
user stories as the prototype is being built.

 Validate. Every developer watching users try out the prototype 
this is the best way to discover major issues with its UX design, 
which in  turn lets you start iterating immediately. This is critical 
to capturing potential learning opportunities by exposing 
product decision makers to user feedback in real time.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 21



Interface Design Evaluation 
Cycle

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 22



User Interface Design 
Evaluation Criteria
The design model (user stories, storyboard, personas, etc.) of the 
interface can be evaluated during early design reviews:
1. Length and complexity of the requirements model or written 

specification of the system and its interface provide an 
indication of the amount of learning required by users of the 
system.

2. Number of user tasks specified and the average number of 
actions per task provide an indication of interaction time and 
the overall efficiency of the system.

3. Number of actions, tasks, and system states indicated by the 
design model imply the memory load on users of the system.

4. Interface style, help facilities, and error-handling protocol 
provide a general indication of the complexity of the interface 
and the degree to which it will be accepted by the user.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 23



Usability Guidelines 
 Anticipation. An application should be designed so that it 

anticipates the user’s next move. 
 Communication. The interface should communicate the 

status of any activity initiated by the user. 
 Consistency. The use of navigation controls, menus, icons, 

and aesthetics (For example, color, shape, layout) should 
be consistent throughout. 

 Controlled Autonomy. The interface should facilitate user 
movement throughout the application, but it should do so 
in a manner that enforces navigation conventions that 
have been established for the application. 

 Efficiency. The design of the application and its interface 
should optimize the user’s work efficiency.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 24



Usability Guidelines 
 Flexibility. The interface should be flexible enough to enable 

some users to accomplish tasks directly and others to 
explore the application in a somewhat random fashion. 

 Focus. The interface (and the content it presents) should 
stay focused on the user task(s) at hand. 

 Human Interface Objects. A vast library of reusable human 
interface objects has been developed for both Web and 
mobile apps. Use them. 

 Latency Reduction. Rather than making the user wait for 
some internal operation to complete (for example, 
downloading a complex graphical image), the application 
should use multitasking in a way that lets the user proceed 
with work as if the operation has been completed. 

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 25



Usability Guidelines 
 Learnability. An application interface should be designed to 

minimize learning time and, once learned, to minimize 
relearning required when the app is revisited.

 Metaphors. An interface that uses an interaction metaphor is 
easier to learn and easier to use, as long as the metaphor is 
appropriate for the application and the user.

 Readability. All information presented through the interface 
should be readable by young and old. 

 Track State. When appropriate, the state of the user interaction 
should be tracked and stored so that a user can log off and 
return later to pick up where he left off.

 Visible Navigation. A well-designed interface provides the 
illusion that users are in the same place, with the work brought 
to them.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 26



Accessibility Guidelines 
 Application Accessibility. Software engineers must ensure that 

interface design encompasses mechanisms that enable easy for 
people with special needs.

 Response Time. System response time has two important 
characteristics: length and variability. Aim for consistency to 
avoid user frustration. 

 Help Facilities. Modern software should provide online help 
facilities that enable a user to get a question answered or 
resolve a problem without leaving the interface.

 Error Handling. Every error message or warning produced by an 
interactive system should: use user understandable jargon, 
provide constructive error recovery advice, identify negative 
consequences of errors, contain an audible or visual cue, and 
never blame user for causing the error. 

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 27



Accessibility Guidelines 
 Menu and Command Labeling. The use of window-oriented, 

point-and-pick interfaces has reduced reliance on typed 
commands. However, it is important to: ensure every menu 
option has a command version, make commands easy for users 
to type, make commands easy to remember, allow for 
command abbreviation, make sure menu labels are self-
explanatory, make sure submenus match style of master menu 
items, and ensure command conventions work across the family 
of applications. 

 Internationalization. Software engineers and their managers 
invariably underestimate the effort and skills required to create 
user interfaces that accommodate the needs of different locales 
and languages.

COMP 354, Fall 2023 User Experience Design 28


