






































Tutorial 7


Final Project
COMP 354- Fall 23

Apekshaba Gohil Anam A. Shaikh Marzieh Adeli

apekshabagohil.it@gmail.com anams403@gmail.com marzieh.adeli@gmail.com

mailto:anams403@gmail.com
mailto:marzieh.adeli@gmail.com


Components of Project Report

1. Project Schedule 

2. Risk Analysis and Mitigation Plan

3. Materialized Risks

4. Implementation

5. Testing Strategies

6. Quality Control

7. Revision History and Contributions



1. Schedule

Define a Feasible Schedule with the following:

1. Task Description

2. Task Ownership

3. Estimated Time to Complete the Task(for estimation define which 
technique you feel according to you is suitable for your project)

4. Also, give brief on which tool did you use to manage and keep track 
of your processes or version control, etc.



Estimation Technique

Estimation techniques 

 1. Reconciling- Based

 2. Problem Based

 3. LOC-Based Estimation

 4. FP-Based Estimation

 5. Use-Case Point Estimation



2. Risk Analysis and Mitigation

1. Define the technique you used to identify the risks.

2. Define the impact of your risks (categorize them based on severity, 
low, high, critical, catastrophic)

3. Devise a Mitigation plan for each type of risk



3. Materialized Risks

Materialization occurs when the thing we thought was possible 
actually happens.

Report the materialization related to the project and also when working 
within the team.



4. Implementation

How did you implement your Project using the design strategy (as 
described in Assignment 2)

Describe your implemented components based on that design strategy.



5. Testing Strategy

Define the unit tests you practically applied on your components as 
designed in Assignment 3.

What tool did you use to perform unit tests (e.g. Junit, Mockito, etc.)

As the Integration Strategy defined in your Assignment 3 how did you 
apply it to integrate your software ?

Any tools used and how did that tool help you in the integration.



7. Quality Control

Describe if there were any changes in your requirements, design 
strategies, test-cases or integration plan.

Explain what was the change and why did you change with a clear and 
reasonable justification.

With the change how did you preserve the quality of your software.



8. Revision History and Contribution

Like every assignment we defined the revision history and contribution 
make sure to add this in your final report.



Project Report

Important!

Keep this report as simple and concise as possible.

Maximum number of pages of your report must not exceed more than 20.

Be brief and precise about why and how did you plan and use the implementation.

During implementation if there is any change in your project (e.g. change in your 
implementation plan itself) do mention it in your project with a justification.



Project

Your ConcordiaCart Web App must focus on mainly 

For Customer :

1. Display Most Selling/ Least Selling Items (User Recommendation you must use any 
parameter for recommendation) 

2. Display Discount based on recommendations

3. Used Products Panel

For Admin:

1. Discount for most selling/ least selling items

2. Stock Management



Project

It’s a web-app so make sure depending on the user login we get the 
information based on the user account.

In your demo, make sure to show your test cases as described in the 
project report.



Components of Project Report



1. Schedule



2. Risk Analysis



3. Materialized Risk



4. Implementation

They have used the MVC

Architecture and that’s how

they have explained their

implementation task.



4. Implementation



4. Implementation



5. Testing Strategy 



5. Testing Strategies



7. Quality Control

The example doesn’t contain this part but you do need to mention it in 
your project report.

Discuss the changes to the requirements, designs and test cases to 
ensure the quality of your design software.



8. Revision History and Contributions


	Slide 1: Final Project
	Slide 2: Components of Project Report 
	Slide 3: 1. Schedule
	Slide 4: Estimation Technique
	Slide 5: 2. Risk Analysis and Mitigation
	Slide 6:  3. Materialized Risks
	Slide 7: 4. Implementation
	Slide 8: 5. Testing Strategy
	Slide 9: 7. Quality Control
	Slide 10: 8. Revision History and Contribution
	Slide 11: Project Report
	Slide 12: Project
	Slide 13: Project
	Slide 14: Components of Project Report
	Slide 15: 1. Schedule
	Slide 16: 2. Risk Analysis
	Slide 17: 3. Materialized Risk
	Slide 18: 4. Implementation
	Slide 19: 4. Implementation
	Slide 20: 4. Implementation
	Slide 21: 5. Testing Strategy 
	Slide 22: 5. Testing Strategies
	Slide 23: 7. Quality Control
	Slide 24: 8. Revision History and Contributions

